The concept presented in Fig. 2 is one possible way to use a Bio-Commons license in order to foster open source antibiotic drug discovery. It can be considered a template which may be redesigned to fit any particular need. Citizens and Scientists could participate within a global community around Biostrike, collaborating to find new antibiotics. Specialists from all fields of expertise would put together their knowledge to build the tool sets – that is wetware, hardware and software – to enable decentralized research on antibiotics. Governments, citizens, NGOs or companies could provide the necessary funding to the community to conduct the research. To coordinate the research activities and to allocate the funding in a productive way, the community would be organized in a democratic manner, voting on which projects should be supported. Any digital redescription of discoveries or inventions of the research activities would be collected in a common database. All data of this database would be under the protection of the Bio-Commons License.
 
 [put grafic here]
Fig. 2: An example of how a Bio-Commons license could be applied to encompass the decentralized and global research project Biostrike for overcoming the antibiotics crisis. Description see text.
To translate the database knowledge into industrially produced drugs, the Biostrike community could negotiate the conditions with private corporations to take over product development, production and sale. A Bio-Commons license could for example make obligations for companies seeking to use the generated knowledge under its protection. Here, ethical norms could aid in the prevention of abuse of knowledge contained in the database. However, the scope of the license and the conditions for the use of knowledge is yet to be determined. Various license models with different conditions can be formulated. To realize a decentralized, community-based drug discovery project, the Bio-Commons license must be legally valid in as many countries as possible. Governments could support the project by helping to formulate the license models and adjust by their laws internationally to encompass new IP regimes that are better adapted to the life sciences.
