In various citizen scientist communities around the world, the problem of the post-antibiotic era was repeatedly addressed. ,  The WHO reports that the last new antibiotic was developed 1987 and since then, no new drug was introduced to the market.  An overuse of the available antibiotics and subsequent evolutionary pressure led to the development of multi-resistant bacteria. By now, the situation is becoming urgent, as very few effective drugs are left to treat infections. 
“Antibiotic resistance is a worldwide problem. New forms of antibiotic resistance can cross international boundaries and spread between continents with ease. Many forms of resistance spread with remarkable speed. World health leaders have described antibiotic-resistant microorganisms as “nightmare bacteria” that “pose a catastrophic threat” to people in every country in the world” (CDC) 
It has been reported that to date 60% of clinically isolated Staphlococcus aureus are resistant to methicillin, while in 1990 it was only 25%.  Similar numbers exist for most of the known antibiotics.   Antibiotic resistance development is a natural process. Bacteria are under selective pressure and evolve mechanisms to avoid the antimicrobial effects of the substances. Once developed, the genes for the resistance then rapidly spread and even cross over between different species -  a process called horizontal gene transfer. It therefore is necessary to continuously develop new antibiotics to keep up with resistant bacteria. 

"The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control estimates that antimicrobial resistance (AMR) results each year in 25 000 deaths and related costs of over €1.5 billion in healthcare expenses and productivity losses.”(European Comission) 

"If we fail to act, we are looking at an almost unthinkable scenario where antibiotics no longer work and we are cast back into the dark ages of medicine where treatable infections and injuries will kill once again." (David Cameron)  

Latest reports revealed that there are resistant genes against even the latest version of antibiotics spreading in the environment.   Citizens noted that the reason why no new antibiotics were introduced to the market is not due to a lack of potential substances or scientific inability.  Citizens believed that the main reasons for this development lie in the existing organizational structures predominating in public and private life science and research. One reason is a lack of public research efforts to tackle big societal challenges – despite a general availability of skilled personnel and infrastructure.  The existing publication model is based on competition of scientists to publish first in a journal of high renown. This incentive though hinders a free exchange of knowledge due to paywalls and a reluctance to share results prior publication, as this could impair the chances of the scientists on research funds and career opportunities. This attitude prevents a wider collaboration and open sharing of results and thus makes a global effort to develop new antibiotics extremely difficult. Another, even more problematic reason is a classical market failure in the pharmaceutical branch. Apart from the costs associated with regulation and cautious clinical testing of new pharmaceuticals – based on sound arguments – market mechanisms contribute significantly to the increase in costs of drug research and development. The effect was described as ‘Eroom’s Law’, which refers to the Moore’s Law of the computer chip industry, stating a doubling of efficiency of the technology at the same costs at a given time interval. Eroom’s Law (Moore spelled backwards), describes exactly the opposite phenomenon. Despite a steady exponential increase of available scientific information in form of peer reviewed publications   and digital database sizes , the number of new drugs which were introduced to the market per billion dollar spent fell exponentially.

“Eroom’s Law indicates that powerful forces have outweighed scientific, technical and managerial improvements over the past 60 years, and/or that some of the improvements have been less ‘improving’ than commonly thought. The more positive anyone is about the past several decades of progress, the more negative they should be about the strength of countervailing forces.” 

Due to the high costs and the risky nature of drug development, there is a tendency to push for even higher shareholder revenue from a newly developed drug. Thus there is a lack of financial incentives for the pharmaceutical industry to get involved in the development of drugs with a small profit margin. 
 “Pharma industry is profit driven and interested only in chronic diseases, the costs of any research/clinical trials are high and they are also strategizing because they know governments will have to come and offer them money for this type of research, which is already happening in the US and EU. They simply wait so they can milk the governments. In 1990 there were 18 companies developing new antibiotics, by 2011 there were only 4. In 1990 10 new antibiotics were licenced, in 2011 only 2.  In 2013 Glaxo and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services agreed to work on new antibiotics. And the government could pay Glaxo as much as $200 million over the next five years, if things go well in EU  , ” (Denisa Kera) 
Dr. Charles Knirsh, V.P. Clinical Research for Pfizer for example explains why Pfizer cannot continue their research into drug-resistant bacteria:
“These are portfolio decisions about how we can serve medical need in the best way.[…] We want to stay in the business of providing new therapeutics for the future. Our investors require that of us. I think society wants Pfizer to be doing what we do in 20 years. We make portfolio management decisions.” (Dr. Charles Knirsh)  
In near future, this market development is not going to change dramatically.  That is especially problematic regarding the situation of available antibiotics. The WHO reports:
“In a field which offers little or no financial incentive to the major pharmaceutical companies, innovations are urgently needed to stimulate the research and the discovery of antimicrobials and vaccines, and to devise funding arrangements and partnerships to support research and development” (WHO)  

The problem of antibiotic overuse is made even worse through market mechanisms. Companies that develop antibiotics need to market the use of their drugs in order to get the necessary revenue to compensate their investments. However, the more they sell, the faster multi-resistant bacteria develop. As a countermeasure, users, distributors and producers of antibiotics should be obliged to be prudent with marketing and consumption of the antibiotics. Fewer sales and less consumption, however reduce profit margins and lead to increased product costs. Thus, the incentives for private companies are further lowered to invest into antibiotics development.  
