Although the classical tragedy of the commons is highly unlikely with digital information, this does not mean that Bio-Commons should remain unregulated. A regulatory framework is required to prevent a market failure in the digital world. Furthermore, new knowledge in the life sciences may create ethical and social problems that need to be addressed. The Bio-Commons license could make licensing easier for researchers and thereby stabilize global collaborations that will help to overcome the ‘Tragedy of the Anticommons’ as described for the situation around antibiotics research. A widely accepted regulatory framework would be needed to provide legal security and reliability as well as equal, transparent, and fair terms for all stakeholders. All participation of stakeholders should be entirely voluntary and the knowledge falling under the license protection must not be in violation to other types of IP. However, as the knowledge basis in the life sciences is growing at exponential rates, there will be enough new information generated in the near future to quickly build up comprehensive databases. Knowledge to date still protected by closed source IP systems will thus become relatively unimportant in the context of the speed of knowledge gain. Besides these practical goals, Bio-Commons licenses could be used to protect and manage any type of biological knowledge in order to curtail possible misuse, e.g. for experiments that are unethical or to produce harmful substances. The larger the community of people contributing to the Bio-Commons, and the better it is backed by societies, the more effective the protection of knowledge under a Bio-Commons license will become. Even though the cost for the development of new substances like antibiotics could be reduced, there are still costs for the underlying research that has to be mounted. New modes of funding could be explored by communities as they were proposed to manage the Biostrike project. To guarantee a fair distribution of funding and have a most productive research management, Citizens proposed democratic decision making procedures. There are a number of problems arising with the use of such a democratic mechanism and the Bio-Commons concept. It is foreseeable that there will be a hierarchy around the Bio-Commons, with interest groups trying to influence the use of the Bio-Commons. This could subsequently lead once more to a technology lock-in and create a similar problem to the one society faces it today with patent based IP. Before creating a democratically controlled Bio-Commons, a couple of questions need to be addressed: who is going to decide on the distribution of the Bio-Commons? Who is going to define the meaning of Bio-Commons, and how? Is there a limit to the number of people involved? What are the pragmatic problems associated with the everyday use of Bio-Commons? What to do in case of a conflict of interest? The reflections on how to manage Bio-Commons are surely not yet complete and will have to be intensified in an ongoing process in the near future. One essential point, though, has already been defined by the citizens: Commons are transitory by nature and resist conclusive definition. The future use of life science knowledge needs to remain open, multi-directional and exitable. At the current speed of life science development, the half life of a license will therefore most likely be rather short.  Thus, it needs flexibility to adapt regulation to upcoming challenges.  Independent of how well the Bio-Commons license will be conceptualized, there has to be a clearly defined exit-option describing what is happening with the contained knowledge and values, when the license model becomes outdated. In future, there can be a great number of licenses and organizational models around it, allowing for all sorts of underlying ethical principles, rules for regulation and market models. By using platforms based on the blockchain technology, these license regimes could even overlap or have defined interfaces, mutually allowing for use of contained knowledge. It will depend on the legal authorities of societies to decide which ones to promote and which ones to block. Licenses with a solid ethical foundation, smart and convenient knowledge handling, low costs of maintenance and a widely accepted legal basis will be most attractive. Eventually, policy makers of national states might need to adapt some exiting regulation to encompass these new licensing regimes (compare Fig. 3). Policy makers are welcome to consult with citizens to set out for new and experimental forms of handling life science knowledge, help to build a civil society around the Bio-Commons and to find the best way to make use thereof. 
