“If it is not true it is very well invented.” (Giordano Bruno)  

To fruitfully initiate a broader discussion about the underlying principles for the Bio-Commons, a mutually understandable bio-language needs to be developed which allows all stakeholders to address relevant questions. To develop such a language, stakeholders need to become familiar with the materialistic and the abstract aspects of living systems. A living system here means any life-form consisting of a single or multitude of cells and the corresponding matter it requires for sustained survival. According to the concept of ‘Code Duality’ by Jesper Hoffmeyer, the code of life appears as a ‘digital’ redescription of an ‘analog’ function and structure. Or in other words: life can be considered software and hardware in one. The analog structure and function themselves are thus the materialistically pronounced version of the digital code, while the digital code has no meaning without its analog counterpart. Jesper Hoffmeyer writes:
„For a system to be living, it must create itself, i.e. it must contain the distinctions necessary for its own identification as a system. Self-reference is the fundament on which life evolves, it is its most basal requirement. […] But what is the basis of this self reference that is at the basis of life? We shall suggest here that the central feature of living systems allowing for self-reference- and thus the ability to select and respond to differences in their surroundings – the the code-duality, i.e. the ability of a system to represent itself in two different codes, one digital and one analog. […] Thus, self reference clearly depends on some kind of re-description. The system must somehow be able to construct a description of itself in order to perpetuate itself. This description furthermore must stay inactive in – or at least protected from – the life processes of the system, lest the description should change and thereby ultimately die with the system. In other words, the function of this description is to assure the identity of the system through time. It is the memory of the system. […] Eventually the [living] system will survive long enough to pass on its own copy of the digitalized memory (or part of it) to a new generation; this corresponds to a back-translation of the message to the digital form. […] This codification, however, is necessarily analog – since it has to interact with the physical surroundings, and this must share with these surroundings, the properties of physical extension and contiguity. The chain of events that sets life apart from nonlife –i.e., the unending chain of responses to selected differences – thus needs at least two codes: one code for action (behavior) and one code for memory.[…] A digital code is ‘outside’ the sender and the receiver and mediates their relationship; an analog code is the relationship which mediates them” (Jesper Hoffmeyer) 
A recent development emerging at the intersection of synthetic and systems biology is to describe the digital code in form of biological programming languages. The goal of this approach is to find adequate hierarchies of abstraction, modularization and standardization to make biological design easier. A future bio-designer should thus be able to code the properties of a living system on a computer by simply describing the desired features in the biological programming language. The program will then compile a genetic code, which is subsequently synthesized, transformed into an organism and then tested and debugged in the living system – the analog counterpart of the digital code. To date it is hardly possible to blueprint functional genetic parts that work in the real world ab initio. Evolutionary selection mechanisms are needed to achieve the desired functional outcome. The same is true for genetic elements of any size, cells and entire organisms. It can be assumed that this gradually improve with new abstraction layers that are underlying future Bio-languages under constant development. However, the efficiency and speed with which an idea is translated into biological reality will dramatically increase, as well as it will be able to automate its testing and thus extend the quantity of designed organisms. Eventually, humans will refine the Bio-language to a point at which we will ‘speak’ it fluently, intuitively understanding the essential underlying mechanisms of the analog and digital code of living systems.Such an approach is not reductionist and cannot be deterministic, but is an iterative and highly creative process. Erich Berger from the Finnish Society of Bioart correctly notes that
 “there is [also] a realization of the kinship between art and science. Artists recognize that both are creative practices exploring our world through common core processes with a mutual interest in questions of philosophy, ethics and politics.[…] One fundamental reason [for artists to involve in biology] is the realization that life sciences and technology are among the most potent forces transforming our life-world. Genetically modified organisms, synthetic biology, and environmental concerns lead artists to engage with the sciences behind these developments to find a cultural response to new emerging questions and issues concerning society.” (Erich Berger) 
